\input texinfo
@setfilename bpel2owfn
@include version.texi
@afourpaper
@settitle Translating @acronym{BPEL} Processes to Open Workflow Nets

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
This manual is for @acronym{BPEL2oWFN}, Version @value{VERSION}, a tool
translating business processes described in @acronym{BPEL} to open workflow
nets (@acronym{oWFN}), last updated @value{UPDATED}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2005, 2006 Niels Lohmann

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.



@acronym{BPEL2oWFN} is licensed under the @acronym{GNU} General Public License.

Copyright @copyright{} 2005, 2006 Niels Lohmann, Christian Gierds and Dennis
Reinert.

@end copying

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @acronym{BPEL2oWFN}
@subtitle Installation Manual
@subtitle Translating @acronym{BPEL} Processes to Open Workflow Nets
@subtitle @acronym{BPEL2oWFN} Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Niels Lohmann

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @acronym{BPEL2oWFN}
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Make Targets::
* Programs Needed::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@contents
@paragraphindent none



@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Make Targets
@chapter Make Targets

@table @samp
@item all
Compile @acronym{BPEL2oWFN} and its documentation.

@item clean
Clean all temporary files created during the compilation.

@item distclean
Clean all that do not belong to the distribution, i.e. any file created during
compilation. Executables as well as the created documentation are also removed.

@item check
Performs a number of self-tests. The directory @file{test} contains several
@acronym{BPEL} processes.

@item dist
Creates a zipped tarball containing all files of the distribution.
@end table




@node Programs Needed
@chapter Programs Needed
To compile @acronym{BPEL2oWFN} you need the following programs. These programs
are (as @acronym{BPEL2oWFN} itself) free software distributed under the
@acronym{GNU} General Public License.

@table @asis
@item @b{Flex}, A fast scanner generator
Flex is needed to generate the lexer of @acronym{BPEL2oWFN}. Flex was written
by Vern Paxon. Copyright @copyright{} 1990 The Regents of the University of
California. All rights reserved. Flex is available under
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/flex/flex.html}.

@item @b{Bison}, The YACC-compatible Parser Generator
Bison is needed to generate the parser of @acronym{BPEL2oWFN}. Bison was
written by Robert Corbett und Richard Stallman. Copyright @copyright{} 1992,
1998, 1999, 2003, 2004, 2005 Free Software Foundation, Inc. Bison is available
under @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/bison/bison.html}.

@item @b{Kimwitu++}, The Term Processor
Kimwitu++ is needed to generate all files managing the @acronym{AST, abstract
syntax tree}. Kimwitu++ was written by Toby Neumann and Michael Piefel.
Copyright @copyright{} 1988-1997  Axel Belinfante, University of Twente.
Copyright @copyright{} 1997-2000  Michael Piefel, Humboldt-University Berlin.
Kimwitu++ is available under
@url{http://site.informatik.hu-berlin.de/kimwitu++}.
@end table

@acronym{BPEL2oWFN} is a compiler and thus creating output files which can be
read by several other programs. These programs are not needed to compile
@acronym{BPEL2oWFN} yet without these programs @acronym{BPEL2oWFN} makes not
much sense.

@table @asis
@item @b{LoLA}, a Low Level Petri net Analyzer
LoLA is an explicit model checker implementing a broad variety of reduction
techniques such as partial order reduction, symmetries or the sweep line
method. LoLA was written by Karsten Schmidt. LoLA is available under
@url{http://www.informatik.hu-berlin.de/~kschmidt/lola.html}.

@item @b{Graphviz}, the Graph Visualization Software
Graphviz is a graph visualization software with several graph layout programs
including dot. Graphviz is maintained by AT&T Labs and is available under
@url{http://www.graphviz.org}.

@end table


@bye
@c hello.texi ends here
