\input texinfo
@setfilename simmatch.info
@include version.texi
@afourpaper
@finalout
@settitle Match User's Manual

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@copying

@b{About this document:}

This manual is for oWFN2BPEL, version @value{VERSION}, a tool that translates a Petri net model into an abstract BPEL process, last updated @value{UPDATED}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Niels Lohmann

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,'' and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You are free to copy and modify this GNU Manual. Buying copies from GNU Press supports the FSF in developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Service Analysis Tools
@direntry
* owfn2bpel: (owfn2bpel).       oWFN2BPEL.
@end direntry


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage

@title oWFN2BPEL

@subtitle translates a Petri net model into an abstract BPEL process
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}

@author Niels Lohmann

@page


@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top WS-Fix
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Options::Invoking oWFN2BPEL.
* GNU Free Documentation License::The license of this manual.
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@contents
@paragraphindent none

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------


@node Options
@chapter Invoking oWFN2BPEL

@section Command line options

@cartouche
@smallexample
Usage: owfn2bpel -iFILE|--input=FILE [-h|--help] [--full-help] [-V|--version] 
         [-oFILE|--output=FILE] [-r|--remove-opaque] [-s|--stats]

About owfn2bpel:
  -h, --help           Print help and exit
      --full-help      Print help, including hidden options, and exit
  -V, --version        Print version and exit

File input/output:
  -i, --input=FILE     Read oWFN from file. Note that a node name may not be 
                         the prefix of another ('t1' and 't12' is not allowed), 
                         node names may not end with '_', and arc weights are 
                         not supported. (mandatory)
  -o, --output=FILE    Write generated BPEL process to file. When the parameter 
                         is not given, the filename is derived from the input 
                         oWFN file.

Options:
  -r, --remove-opaque  Removes opaque activities where possible. These 
                         activities are mainly translations from 
                         non-communicating transitions.  (default=off)

Debug and verbose output:
  -s, --stats          Shows statistical values (the number of executions) 
                         after the end of the transformation.  (default=off)
@end smallexample
@end cartouche




@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@include fdl.texi

@bye
