\input texinfo
@setfilename mia.info
@include version.texi
@afourpaper
@finalout
@settitle Mia User's Manual

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@copying

@b{About this document:}

This manual is for Mia, version @value{VERSION}, a tool to calculate information for instance migration, last updated @value{UPDATED}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2009 Niels Lohmann

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the @acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A @acronym{GNU} Manual,'' and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``@acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You are free to copy and modify this @acronym{GNU} Manual. Buying copies from @acronym{GNU} Press supports the FSF in developing @acronym{GNU} and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory service-technology.org
@direntry
* mia: (mia).       Mia.
@end direntry


@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage

@title Mia

@subtitle Migration of Instances of Services
@subtitle @url{http://service-technology.org/mia}
@vskip 0.5em
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}

@author Niels Lohmann
@page


@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Mia
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* First Steps::How to set up and install Mia.
* Command Line Options::How to run Mia.
* ChangeLog::Version history.
* GNU Free Documentation License::The license of this manual.
@end menu

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@contents
@paragraphindent none

@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node First Steps
@chapter First Steps

@section Setup and Installation

@enumerate
@item Go to @url{http://service-technology.org/files/mia} and download the latest release version of Mia, say @file{mia-@value{VERSION}.tar.gz}. To setup and compile Mia, change into your download directory and type

@cartouche
@smallexample
tar xfz mia-@value{VERSION}.tar.gz
cd mia-@value{VERSION}
./configure
make
@end smallexample
@end cartouche

After compilation, a binary @samp{src/mia} is generated.@footnote{On Microsoft Windows, the file will be called @file{mia.exe}.} If you experience any compiler warnings, don't panic: Mia contains some generated or third party code that we cannot influence.

@item To test whether everything went fine, type

@cartouche
@smallexample
make check
@end smallexample
@end cartouche

to execute the testcases located in @file{tests}. If everything went fine, you should see something like:@footnote{Some tests use Fiona to check whether the calculated operating guidelines are correct. If Fiona was not found by the configure script, theses tests are skipped.}

@smallexample
## ------------- ##
## Test results. ##
## ------------- ##

All 9 tests were successful.
@end smallexample

If an error occurs, please send the output to @email{mia@@service-technology.org}.

@item To install the binary, the manpage, and the documentation, type

@cartouche
@smallexample
make install
@end smallexample
@end cartouche

You might need superuser permissions to do so.
@end enumerate

If you need any further information, see file @file{INSTALL} for detailed instructions.


@section Contents of the Distribution

The distribution contains several directories:

@table @file
@item doc
The Texinfo documentation of Mia. The documentation can be created using @samp{make pdf}. Note you need to have Mia properly installed before (see installation description above).

@item man
The manpage of Mia which can be displayed using @samp{man mia} after having Mia installed (see installation description above).

@item src
The source code of Mia.

@item tests
Testcases for Mia which check the generated binary.
@end table






@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------


@section Requirements

In order to run, compile, and develop Mia, several tools are required.

@unnumberedsec Runtime
@itemize
@item Wendy (@url{http://service-technology.org/wendy}), at least version 1.4
@item LoLA (@url{http://service-technology.org/lola}), compiled with the @samp{FULL} option
@end itemize

Mia's configure script checks whether these tools (with binaries @file{wendy} and @file{lola-full}) are found in the path and adjusts the configuration file @file{src/mia.conf} accordingly.


@unnumberedsec Compilation
To compile the source code from a source distribution, the following tools are required.

@itemize
@item GCC (@url{http://gcc.gnu.org/})
@item @acronym{GNU} Make (@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/make/})
@end itemize

@unnumberedsec Development
In case you want to make changes to the source code, the following tools are required to reconfigure and compile Mia.

@itemize
@item Autoconf, @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/}
@item Automake, @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/automake/}
@item Bison, @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/bison/}
@item flex, @url{http://flex.sourceforge.net/}
@item Gengetopt, @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/gengetopt/}
@item help2man, @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/help2man/}
@item Texinfo, @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/}
@end itemize




Please check our nightly build server at @url{http://service-technology.org/nightly} for the versions we use during development.







@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------


@node Command Line Options
@chapter Invoking Mia

Mia is a command line tool and does not come with a fancy @acronym{GUI}. However, Mia can be easily scripted and combined with other tools.

@section Command Line Options

For an overview of the command line options, type @samp{mia --help} to see the following help screen:

@smallexample
@verbatiminclude cmdline.out
@end smallexample




@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------


@node ChangeLog
@chapter Version History

Mia is developed under the ``Release Early, Release Often'' maxime (see @url{http://catb.org/~esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/cathedral-bazaar/ar01s04.html}): Whenever enough integrated or a non-trivial changes have summed up, a new version is published. Though this releases might now always mark significant changes, they at least allow to quickly fix bugs and avoid infinite procrastination.

@include ChangeLog.texi

@sp 3

The most recent change log is available at Mia's website at @url{http://service-technology.org/files/mia/ChangeLog}.



@c --------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix The @acronym{GNU} Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@bye
